the eastern phoebe (sayornis phoebe) is a small passerine bird .
 the genus name sayornis is constructed from the specific part of charles lucien bonaparte's name for say's phoebe , muscicapa saya , and ancient greek ornis , "bird" .
 phoebe is an alternative name for the roman moon-goddess diana , but it may also have been chosen to imitate the bird's call .
this tyrant flycatcher breeds in eastern north america , although its normal range does not include the southeastern coastal united states .
it is migratory , wintering in the southernmost usa and central america .
 it is a very rare vagrant to western europe .
 this is one of the first birds to return to the breeding grounds in spring and one of the last to leave in the fall .
 they arrive for breeding in mid-late march , but they return to winter quarters around the same time when other migrant songbirds do , in september and early october; migration times have stayed the same in the last 100 years .
this species appears remarkably big-headed , especially if it puffs up the small crest .
 its plumage is gray-brown above .
 it has a white throat , dirty gray breast and buffish underparts which become whiter during the breeding season .
 two indistinct buff bars are present on each wing .
 its lack of an eye ring and wingbars , and its all dark bill distinguish it from other north american tyrant flycatchers , and it pumps its tail up and down like other phoebes when perching on a branch .
 the eastern phoebe's call is a sharp chip , and the song , from which it gets its name , is fee-bee .
the eastern wood pewee (contopus virens) is extremely similar in appearance and voice .
 it lacks the buff hue usually present on the lighter parts of the eastern phoebe's plumage , and thus has always clearly defined and contrasting wing-bars .
 it also does not bob its tail habitually , and appears on the breeding grounds much later though it leaves for winter quarters at about the same time as the eastern phoebe .
the breeding habitat of the eastern phoebe is open woodland , farmland and suburbs , often near water .
 this phoebe is insectivorous , and often perches conspicuously when seeking food items .
 it also eats fruits and berries in cooler weather .
it often nests on human structures such as bridges and buildings .
 nesting activity may start as early as the first days of april .
 the nest is an open cup with a mud base and lined with moss and grass , built in crevice in a rock or man-made site; 38 eggs are laid .
 both parents feed the young and usually raise two broods per year .
 the eastern phoebe is occasionally host to the nest-parasitic brown-headed cowbird (molothrus ater) .