the rusty blackbird (euphagus carolinus) is a medium-sized blackbird , closely related to grackles ("rusty grackle" is an older name for the species) . it is a bird that prefers wet forested areas , breeding in the boreal forest and muskeg across northern canada , and migrating southeast to the united states during winter . formerly abundant , the rusty blackbird has undergone one of the most rapid declines of any abundant bird species in north america in recent years , for reasons that are not well understood . adults have a pointed bill and a pale yellow eye . they have black plumage; the female is greyer . "rusty" refers to the brownish winter plumage . they resemble the western member of the same genus , the brewer's blackbird; however , this bird has a longer bill and the male's head is iridescent green . their breeding habitat is wet temperate coniferous forests and muskeg across canada and alaska . the cup nest is located in a tree or dense shrub , usually over water . birds often nest at the edge of ponds/wetland complexes and travel large distances to feed at the waters edge . emerging dragonflies and their larvae are important food items during the summer . these birds migrate to the eastern and southeastern united states , into parts of the grain belt , sometimes straying into mexico . they forage on wet ground or in shallow water , mainly eating insects , small fish and some seeds . their most common mode of foraging is to vigorously flip leaves and rip at submerged aquatic vegetation . the mast of small-acorn producing oaks , such as willow oak , is also important . in some areas , the nuts of planted pecans are heavily used . they very rarely will attack small passerine birds , and have been known to kill species as large as common snipe . they feed in flocks during migration and on the wintering grounds , sometimes joining other blackbirds , both often occurring in single species flocks . they more often roost with other blackbirds; some small roosts are in brushy vegetation in old fields and others are in massive mixed flockssometimes in the urban areas . the species nests relatively early for a boreal forest bird . they linger in the boreal zone to complete their molt . their autumn migration is slow , with birds often remaining in the northern states well into december; spring migration is much more rapid . the largest wintering concentrations are found in the lower mississippi valley , with smaller concentrations in the piedmont and south atlantic coastal plain . fairly quiet in fall migration and most of the winter , both males and females will sing (particularly on warm days) in the late winter and spring . the song consists of gurgling and high-pitched squeaks . 