the tree swallow , tachycineta bicolor , is a migratory passerine bird that breeds in north america and winters in mexico , central america and the caribbean . it is a very rare vagrant to western europe . this swallow averages 13.5 cm (5 inches) long and weighs about 20 g . the bill is tiny . the adult tree swallow has iridescent blue-green upperparts , white underparts , and a very slightly forked tail . the female usually has duller colours than the male , often more greenish than the more bluish male . the juvenile plumage is dull grey-brown above and may have hint of a gray breast band . being highly social outside of the breeding season , tree swallows may form flocks of several thousand birds near roost sites . flocks near vacherie , louisiana were estimated to contain well over 1 million birds during december 2009.tree swallows nest in natural or artificial cavities near water and are often found in large flocks . they readily use nest boxes , including those built for bluebirds . declines in cavity-builder populations are resulting in fewer natural nesting sites for tree swallows , although the swallow population remains healthy . the tree swallow nest consists of multiple layers of grasses and thin twigs , and is lined with large feathers from other species . the female lays 4 to 7 white eggs and incubates them by herself . the eggs hatch in about 14 days and the hatchlings are altricial . the hatchlings typically fledge in 1624 days . while there are young or eggs in the nest , adults frequently dive bomb intruders (including curious humans) and attempt to drive them from the area . tree swallows are known to "fight" over feathers in mid-air for reasons which are still under investigation . there is some speculation that this is a form of play . tree swallows are typically single-brooded , although they may attempt a second nest if the first fails early in the season . there are records of parents raising two successful broods in a season . they subsist primarily on a diet of insects , sometimes supplemented with small quantities of fruit . they are excellent fliers and take off from their perch and acrobatically catch insects in their bills in mid-air . 