the caspian tern (hydroprogne caspia , formerly sterna caspia) is a species of tern , with a subcosmopolitan but scattered distribution . despite its extensive range , it is monotypic of its genus , and has no accepted subspecies . the genus name is from ancient greek hudros , "water", and latin progne , "swallow" . the specific caspia is from latin and , like the english name , refers to the caspian sea . it is the world's largest tern with a length of 4856 cm , a wingspan of 127140 cm and a weight of 574782g . adult birds have black legs , and a long thick red-orange bill with a small black tip . they have a white head with a black cap and white neck , belly and tail . the upper wings and back are pale grey; the underwings are pale with dark primary feathers . in flight , the tail is less forked than other terns and wing tips black on the underside . in winter , the black cap is still present (unlike many other terns), but with some white streaking on the forehead . the call is a loud heron-like croak . their breeding habitat is large lakes and ocean coasts in north america (including the great lakes), and locally in europe (mainly around the baltic sea and black sea), asia , africa , and australasia (australia and new zealand) . north american birds migrate to southern coasts , the west indies and northernmost south america . european and asian birds spend the non-breeding season in the old world tropics . african and australasian birds are resident or disperse over short distances . the global population is about 50,000 pairs; numbers in most regions are stable , but the baltic sea population (1,4001,475 pairs in the early 1990s) is declining and of conservation concern . the caspian tern is one of the species to which the agreement on the conservation of african-eurasian migratory waterbirds (aewa) applies . they feed mainly on fish , which they dive for , hovering high over the water and then plunging . they also occasionally eat large insects , the young and eggs of other birds and rodents . they may fly up to 60 km from the breeding colony to catch fish; it often fishes on freshwater lakes as well as at sea . breeding is in spring and summer , with one to three pale blue green eggs , with heavy brown spotting , being laid . they nest either together in colonies , or singly in mixed colonies of other tern and gull species . the nest is on the ground among gravel and sand , or sometimes on vegetation; incubation lasts for 2628 days . the chicks are variable in plumage pattern , from pale creamy to darker grey-brown; this variation assists adults in recognizing their own chicks when returning to the colony from feeding trips . fledging occurs after 3545 days . image:caspian tern takeoff rwd . jpg|preparing for takeoff image:hydroprogne caspia - gould's lagoon . 