the common tern (sterna hirundo) is a seabird of the tern family sternidae . this bird has a circumpolar distribution , its four subspecies breeding in temperate and subarctic regions of europe , asia and north america . it is strongly migratory , wintering in coastal tropical and subtropical regions . breeding adults have light grey upperparts , white to very light grey underparts , a black cap , orange-red legs , and a narrow pointed bill . depending on the subspecies , the bill may be mostly red with a black tip or all black . there are a number of similar species , including the partly sympatric arctic tern , which can be separated on plumage details , leg and bill colour , or vocalisations . breeding in a wider range of habitats than any of its relatives , the common tern nests on any flat , poorly vegetated surface close to water , including beaches and islands , and it readily adapts to artificial substrates such as floating rafts . the nest may be a bare scrape in sand or gravel , but it is often lined or edged with whatever debris is available . up to three eggs may be laid , their dull colours and blotchy patterns providing camouflage on the open beach . incubation is by both sexes , and the eggs hatch in around 2122 days , longer if the colony is disturbed by predators . the downy chicks fledge in 2228 days . like most terns , this species feeds by plunge-diving for fish , either in the sea or in freshwater , but molluscs , crustaceans and other invertebrate prey may form a significant part of the diet in some areas . eggs and young are vulnerable to predation by mammals such as rats and american mink , and large birds including gulls , owls and herons . common terns may be infected by lice , parasitic worms , and mites , although blood parasites appear to be rare . its large population and huge breeding range mean that this species is classed as being of least concern , although numbers in north america have declined sharply in recent decades . despite international legislation protecting the common tern , in some areas populations are threatened by habitat loss , pollution or the disturbance of breeding colonies . the terns , family sternidae , are small to medium-sized seabirds closely related to the gulls , skimmers and skuas . they are gull-like in appearance , but typically have a lighter build , long pointed wings (which give them a fast , buoyant flight), a deeply forked tail , slender legs , and webbed feet . most species are grey above and white below , and have a black cap which is reduced or flecked with white in the non-breeding season . the common tern's closest relatives appear to be the antarctic tern , followed by the eurasian arctic and roseate terns . genetic evidence suggests that the common tern may have diverged from an ancestral stock earlier than its relatives . no fossils are known from north america , and those claimed in europe are of uncertain age and species . the common tern was first described by linnaeus in his systema naturae in 1758 under its current scientific name , sterna hirundo . the word "stearn" was used in old english and a similar word was used by the frisians for tern . "stearn" appears in the poem the seafarer , written around 1000 ad . linnaeus adopted this word for the genus name sterna . the latin for swallow is "hirundo" and refers here to the tern's superficial likeness to that unrelated bird , which has a similar light build and long forked tail . this resemblance also leads to the informal name "sea swallow", recorded from at least the seventeenth century . the scots names picktarnie , tarrock and their many variants are also believed to be onomatopoeic , derived from the distinctive call . due to the difficulty in distinguishing the two species , all the informal common names are shared with the arctic tern . four subspecies of the common tern are generally recognized , although s . h . minussensis is sometimes considered to be an intergrade between s . h . hirundo and s . h . longipennis . the nominate subspecies of the common tern is 3135 cm (1214 in) long , including a 69 cm (2.43.5 in) fork in the tail , with a 7798 cm (3039 in) wingspan . it weighs 110141 g (3.95.0 oz) . breeding adults have pale grey upperparts , very pale grey underparts , a black cap , orange-red legs , and a narrow pointed bill that can be mostly red with a black tip , or all black , depending on the subspecies . the common tern's upperwings are pale grey , but as the summer wears on , the dark feather shafts of the outer flight feathers become exposed , and a grey wedge appears on the wings . the rump and tail are white , and on a standing bird the long tail extends no further than the folded wingtips , unlike the arctic and roseate terns in which the tail protrudes beyond the wings . there are no significant differences between the sexes . in non-breeding adults the forehead and underparts become white , the bill is all black or black with a red base , and the legs are dark red or black . the upperwings have an obvious dark area at the front edge of the wing , the carpal bar . terns that have not bred successfully may start moulting into non-breeding adult plumage from june , but late july is more typical , with the moult suspended during migration . there is also some geographical variation , californian birds often being in non-breeding plumage during migration . juvenile common terns have pale grey upperwings with a dark carpal bar . the crown and nape are brown , and the forehead is ginger , wearing to white by autumn . the upperparts are ginger with brown and white scaling , and the tail lacks the adult's long outer feathers . birds in their first post-juvenile plumage , which normally remain in their wintering areas , resemble the non-breeding adult , but have a duskier crown , dark carpal bar , and often very worn plumage . by their second year , most young terns are either indistinguishable from adults , or show only minor differences such as a darker bill or white forehead . the common tern is an agile flyer , capable of rapid turns and swoops , hovering , and vertical take-off . when commuting with fish , it flies close to the surface in a strong head wind , but 1030 m (3398 ft) above the water in a following wind . unless migrating , normally it stays below 100 m (330 ft), and averages 30 km/h (19 mph) in the absence of a tail wind . its average flight speed during the nocturnal migration flight is 4354 km/h (2734 mph) at a height of 1,0003,000 m (3,3009,800 ft) . the juvenile starts moulting into adult plumage in its first october; the head , tail and body plumage is replaced first , mostly by february , then the wing feathers . the primaries are replaced in stages; the innermost feathers moult first , then replacement is suspended during the southern winter (birds of this age staying in their wintering areas) and recommences in the autumn . in may to june of the second year a similar moult sequence starts , with a pause during primary moult for birds that return north , but not for those that stay in the winter quarters . a major moult to adult breeding plumage occurs in the next february to june , between 4090% of feathers being replaced . old primary feathers wear away to reveal the blackish barbs beneath . the moult pattern means that the oldest feathers are those nearest the middle of the wing , so as the northern summer progresses , a dark wedge appears on the wing due to this feather ageing process . terns are unusual in the frequency in which they moult their primaries , which are replaced at least twice , occasionally three times in a year . the visible difference in feather age is accentuated in the greater ultraviolet reflectance of new primaries , and the freshness of the wing feathers is used by females in mate selection . experienced females tend to accept mates which best show their fitness through the quality of their wing feathers . rarely , a very early moult at the nesting colony may be linked to breeding failure , both the onset of moult and reproductive behaviour being linked to falling levels of the hormone prolactin . there are several terns of a similar size and general appearance to the common tern . a traditionally difficult species to separate is the arctic tern , and until the key characteristics were clarified , distant or flying birds of the two species were often jointly recorded as "commic terns" . although similar in size , the two terns differ in structure and flight . the common tern has a larger head , thicker neck , longer legs , and more triangular and stiffer wings than its relative , and has a more powerful , direct flight . the arctic tern has greyer underparts than the common , which make its white cheeks more obvious , whereas the rump of the common tern can be greyish in non-breeding plumage , compared to the white of its relative . the common tern develops a dark wedge on the wings as the breeding season progresses , but the wings of arctic stay white throughout the northern summer . all the flight feathers of the arctic tern are translucent against a bright sky , only the four innermost wing feathers of the common tern share this property . the trailing edge of the outer flight feathers is a thin black line in the arctic tern , but thicker and less defined in the common . the bill of an adult common tern is orange-red with a black tip , except in black-billed s . h . longipennis , and its legs are bright red , while both features are a darker red colour in the arctic tern , which also lacks the black bill tip . in the breeding areas , the roseate tern can be distinguished by its pale plumage , long , mainly black bill and very long tail feathers . the non-breeding plumage of roseate is pale above and white , sometimes pink-tinged , below . it retains the long tail streamers , and has a black bill . in flight , the roseate's heavier head and neck , long bill and faster , stiffer wingbeats are also characteristic . it feeds further out to sea than the common tern . in north america , the forster's tern in breeding plumage is obviously larger than the common , with relatively short wings , a heavy head and thick bill , and long , strong legs; in all non-breeding plumages , its white head and dark eye patch make the american species unmistakable . in the wintering regions , there are also confusion species , including the antarctic tern of the southern oceans , the south american tern , the australasian white-fronted tern and the white-cheeked tern of the indian ocean . identification may be aided by the plumage differences due to "opposite" breeding seasons . the antarctic tern is more sturdy than the common , with a heavier bill . in breeding condition , its dusky underparts and full black cap outline a white cheek stripe . in non-breeding plumages , it lacks , or has only an indistinct , carpal bar , and young birds show dark bars on the tertials , obvious on the closed wing and in flight . the south american tern is larger than the common , with a larger , more curved red bill , and has a smoother , more extensive black cap in non-breeding plumage . like antarctic , it lacks a strong carpal bar in non-breeding plumages , and it also shares the distinctive barring of the tertials in young birds . the white-fronted tern has a white forehead in breeding plumage , a heavier bill , and in non-breeding plumage is paler below than the common , with white underwings . the white-cheeked tern is smaller , has uniform grey upperparts , and in breeding pumage is darker above with whiter cheeks . juvenile common terns are easily separated from similar-aged birds of related species . they show extensive ginger colouration to the back , and have a pale base to the bill . young arctic terns have a grey back and black bill , and juvenile roseate terns have a distinctive scalloped "saddle" . hybrids between common and roseate terns have been recorded , particularly from the us , and the intermediate plumage and calls shown by these birds is a potential identification pitfall . such birds may have more extensive black on the bill , but confirmation of mixed breeding may depend on the exact details of individual flight feathers . 