the painted bunting (passerina ciris) is a species of bird in the cardinal family , cardinalidae , that is native to north america . the bright plumage of the male only comes in the second year of life; in the first year they can only be distinguished from the female by close inspection . the painted bunting was one of the many species originally described by linnaeus in his eighteenth century work systema naturae . there are four recognized subspecies of the painted bunting:the male painted bunting is often described as the most beautiful bird in north america and as such has been nicknamed nonpareil , or "without equal" . its colors , dark blue head , green back , red rump , and underparts , make it extremely easy to identify , but it can still be difficult to spot since it often skulks in foliage even when it is singing . the plumage of female and juvenile painted buntings is green and yellow-green , serving as camouflage . once seen , the adult female is still distinctive , since it is a brighter , truer green than other similar songbirds . adult painted buntings can measure 1214 cm (4.75.5 in) in length , span 2123 cm (8.39.1 in) across the wings and weigh 1319 g (0.460.67 oz) . the juveniles have two inserted moults in their first autumn , each yielding plumage like an adult females . the first starts a few days after fledging replacing the juvenile plumage with an auxiliary formative plumage; the second a month or so later giving the formative plumage . the painted bunting occupies typical habitat for a member of its family . it is found in thickets , woodland edges with riparian thickets , shrubbery and brushy areas . in the east , the species breeds in maritime hammocks and scrub communities . today , it is often found along roadsides and in suburban areas , and in gardens with dense , shrubby vegetation . the wintering habitat is typically the shrubby edges along the border of tropical forests or densely vegetated savanna . the breeding range is divided into two geographically separate areas . these include southern arizona , southern new mexico , southern and eastern texas , oklahoma , arkansas , louisiana , northern florida , coastal georgia , the southern coast and inland waterways such as the santee river of south carolina and northern mexico . they winter in south florida , cuba , the bahamas , along both coasts of mexico and through much of central america . occasionally , they may be vagrants further north , including to new york pennsylvania and new jersey . the bird is also found every few years as far north as new brunswick , canada . painted buntings are shy , secretive and often difficult to observe for the human eye , though can be fairly approachable where habituated to bird feeders . males sing in spring from exposed perches to advertise their territories . they also engage in visual displays including flying bouncingly like a butterfly or in an upright display , body-fluff display , bow display and wing-quiver display . these displays are used in agonistic conflicts with other males or in breeding displays for females , with females rarely engaging in displays . occasionally , males may physically clash with each other and may even kill each other in such conflicts . when their breeding season has concluded , buntings migrate by night over short to medium distances . western birds (arizona and northern mexico) molt in mid-migration , while eastern birds tend to molt before they migrate . painted buntings often feed by hopping along the ground , cautiously stopping every few moments to look around . the painted bunting regularly eats a large quantity of grass seeds , including; panicum , amaranthus , oxalis , euphorbia and carex . seeds are eaten almost exclusively during winter . while breeding , painted bunting and nestlings mainly eat small invertebrates , including; spiders , snails , grasshoppers , caterpillars and other insects . they have been known to regularly visit spider webs to pick off small insects caught in them . painted buntings are mostly monogamous and are solitary or in pairs during the breeding season , but sometimes exhibit polygyny . the breeding season begins in late april and lasts through to early august , with activity peaking mid-may through to mid-july . the male arrives about a week before the female and starts to establish a small territory . the nest is typically hidden in low , dense vegetation and is built by the females and woven into the surrounding vegetation for strength . each brood contains three or four gray-white eggs , often spotted with brown , which are incubated for around 10 days until the altricial young are hatched . the female alone cares for the young . the hatchlings are brooded for approximately 12 to 14 days and then fledge at that time . about 30 days after the first eggs hatch , the female painted bunting usually lays a second brood . nests are often parasitized by cowbirds . common predators at the nest of eggs , young , and brooding females are large snakes , including coachwhip snakes , eastern kingsnakes , eastern racers and black rat snakes . bird-hunting raptors , including short-tailed hawks , accipiter hawks , and even the small passerine loggerhead shrike , may hunt painted buntings , including the conspicuous breeding-plumaged male . the painted bunting can live to over 10 years of age , though most wild buntings probably live barely half that long . 