the bohemian waxwing (bombycilla garrulus) is a starling-sized passerine bird that breeds in the northern forests of eurasia and north america . it has mainly buff-grey plumage , black face markings and a pointed crest . its wings are patterned with white and bright yellow , and some feather tips have the red waxy appearance that give this species its english name . the three subspecies show only minor differences in appearance . females are similar to males , although young birds are less well-marked and have few or no waxy wingtips . although the bohemian waxwing's range overlaps those of the cedar and japanese waxwings , it is easily distinguished from them by size and plumage differences . the breeding habitat is coniferous forests , usually near water . the pair build a lined cup-shaped nest in a tree or bush , often close to the trunk . the clutch of 37 eggs is incubated by the female alone for 1314 days to hatching . the chicks are altricial and naked , and are fed by both parents , initially mostly with insects , but thereafter mainly fruit . they fledge about 1416 days after leaving the egg . many birds desert their nesting range in winter and migrate farther south . in some years , large numbers of bohemian waxwings irrupt well beyond their normal winter range in search of the fruit that makes up most of their diet . waxwings can be very tame in winter , entering towns and gardens in search of food , rowan berries being a particular favourite . they can metabolise alcohol produced in fermenting fruit , but can still become intoxicated , sometimes fatally . other hazards include predation by birds of prey , infestation by parasites and collisions with cars or windows . the bohemian waxwing's high numbers and very large breeding area mean that it is classified as being of least concern by the international union for conservation of nature . the waxwings are a family , bombycillidae , of short-tailed stocky birds with soft plumage , a head crest and distinctively patterned wings and tails . there are three species , the bohemian , cedar , and japanese waxwings . dna studies and shared features such as a relatively large size , grey underparts and similar undertail patterns suggest that the japanese and bohemian waxwings are most closely related within the genus . although only the cedar and bohemian waxwings normally have red tips on their wing feathers , this feature is occasionally shown by the japanese waxwing , suggesting that this was originally a whole-family characteristic that has been lost in one species , rather than an indicator of a close relationship . dna analysis confirms that the cedar waxwing diverged early from the other members of the family . outside the genus , the closest relatives of the waxwings are believed to be the silky-flycatchers , the palmchat , and the grey hypocolius , all of which have sometimes been included in the bombycillidae . the bohemian waxwing was described by linnaeus in his systema naturae in 1758 as lanius garrulus . the waxwings were moved to their own genus , bombycilla , by vieillot in 1808. the genus name bombycilla comes from the greek bombux , "silk" and the modern latin cilla , "tail"; this is a direct translation of the german seidenschwanz , "silk-tail", and refers to the silky-soft plumage of the bird . the species name garrulus is the latin for talkative and was applied to this bird , as "garrulus bohemicus", by conrad gessner in 1555; the term is a reference to a supposed likeness to the eurasian jay (garrulus glandarius) rather than to the waxwing's vocalisations . the english name "waxwing" refers to the bright red tips of the secondary feathers on its wings , which look like drops of sealing wax , while "bohemian" follows gessner's usage , and may refer to the romani , alluding to the bird's wanderings , or to its presumed origin from bohemia . "waxwing" and "bohemian waxwing" were first recorded in 1817, the former as a reference to vieillot's separation of this bird from the "chatterers" . there are three recognised subspecies:the differences between these forms are small and clinal , and the species could be possibly considered as monotypic . the fossil record includes pleistocene deposits from the uk and the carpathian mountains . the bohemian waxwing is a starling-sized bird 1923 cm (7.59.1 in) in length with a 3235.5 cm (12.614.0 in) wingspan , and an average weight of 55 g (1.9 oz) . it is short-tailed , mainly brownish-grey , and has a conspicuous crest on its head . the male of the nominate subspecies has a black mask through the eye and a black throat . there is a white streak behind the bill and a white curve below the eye . the lower belly is a rich chestnut colour and there are cinnamon-coloured areas around the mask . the rump is grey and the tail ends in a bright yellow band with a broad black border above it . the wings are very distinctive; the flight feathers are black and the primaries have markings that produce a yellow stripe and white "fishhooks" on the closed wing . the adult's secondaries end in long red appendages with the sealing wax appearance that gives the bird its english name . the eyes are dark brown , the bill is mainly black , and the legs are dark grey or black . in flight , the waxwing's large flocks , long wings and short tail give some resemblance to the common starling , and its flight is similarly fast and direct . it clambers easily through bushes and trees but only shuffles on the ground . the soft , dense feathers are kept in good condition by preening . the red waxy tips are the extended and flattened ends of feather shafts , pigmented with astaxanthin and enclosed in a transparent sheath . a study of the cedar waxwings showed that the red tips are few or absent until the third year of life for that related species . all adult waxwings have a complete moult annually between august and january . juveniles moult at the same time but retain their flight and some other wing feathers . the female bohemian waxwing is very similar to the male , but has a narrower yellow terminal band to the tail , a less defined lower edge to the black throat and slightly less distinctive wing markings . juveniles are duller than adults , with whiter underparts , only a few red wing tips , no black on the throat and a smaller black face mask . compared to the nominate subspecies , eastern b . g . centralasiae is paler , greyer and has little reddish-brown behind the bill . the american subspecies b . g . pallidiceps has more colouring on the cheeks and forehead than the nominate form and is otherwise generally duller in appearance . the range of the bohemian waxwing overlaps those of both the other members of the genus . the cedar waxwing is smaller than the bohemian; it has browner upperparts , a white undertail and a white line above the black eye patch . adult cedar waxwings have a yellowish belly , and all ages have less strongly patterned wings than the bohemian waxwing . the japanese waxwing is easily distinguished from its relatives; it has a red terminal band to the tail , the black mask extends up the rear of the crest , and there is no yellow stripe or red tips on the wings . the bohemian waxwing's call is a high trill sirrrr . it is less wavering and lower-pitched than that of the cedar waxwing , and longer and lower-pitched than the call of the japanese waxwing . other calls are just variants of the main vocalisation; a quieter version is used by chicks to call parents , and courtship calls , also given during nest construction , have a particularly large frequency range . although not a call as such , when a flock takes off or lands , the wings make a distinctive rattling sound that can be heard 30 m (98 ft) away . the bohemian waxwing has a circumpolar distribution , breeding in northern regions of eurasia and north america . in eurasia , its northern nesting limit is just short of the treeline , roughly at the 10 c july isotherm , and it breeds south locally to about 51n . most birds breed between 6067n , reaching 70n in scandinavia . the north american subspecies breeds in the northwestern and north central areas of the continent , its range extending southwards beyond the us border in the rocky mountains . this waxwing is migratory with much of the breeding range abandoned as the birds move south for the winter . migration starts in september in the north of the range , a month or so later farther south . eurasian birds normally winter from eastern britain through northern parts of western and central europe , ukraine , kazakhstan and northern china to japan . north american breeders have a more southeasterly trend , many birds wintering in southeast canada , with smaller numbers in the north central and northeastern us states . birds do not usually return to the same wintering sites in successive years . one bird wintering in the ukraine was found 6,000 km (3,700 mi) to the east in siberia in the following year . in some years , this waxwing irrupts south of its normal wintering areas , sometimes in huge numbers . the fruit on which the birds depend in winter varies in abundance from year to year , and in poor years , particularly those following a good crop the previous year , the flocks move farther south until they reach adequate supplies . they will stay until the food runs out and move on again . in what may be the largest ever irruption in europe , in the winter of 20042005, more than half a million waxwings were recorded in germany alone . this invasion followed an unusually warm , dry breeding season . in 1908, an american flock 6090 m (200300 ft) wide was noted as taking two to three minutes to fly over . the breeding habitat is mature conifers , often spruce although other conifers and broadleaf trees may also be present . more open , wet areas such as lakes and peat swamps with dead and drowned trees are used for feeding on insects . lowlands , valleys and uplands are used in eurasia , although mountains tend to be avoided . however , the north american subspecies nests in canada at altitudes between 9001,550 m (2,9505,090 ft) . outside the breeding season , the waxwing will occupy a wide range of habitats as long as suitable fruits such as rowan are available . it may be found by roads , in parks and gardens or along hedges or woodlands edges . it shows little fear of humans at this time . in winter , waxwings roost communally in dense trees or hedges , sometimes with american robins , fieldfares or other wintering species . bohemian waxwings start their return from the wintering grounds in february or march , but northern breeders do not reach their breeding areas until april or early may . this monogamous species nests mainly from mid june to july . waxwings are not highly territorial , and , although normally solitary breeders , several pairs may nest close together where there are a number of good nest sites . males may sometimes deter rivals from approaching their mates , and females may squabble over nest sites . aggression is shown by sleeking down the feathers and crest , showing the black throat , and opening the bill . the breeding display is almost the opposite of this; the male erects his body and crest feathers , and turns his head away from the female . the male may repeatedly present a gift of a small item , often food , to his partner , placing it in her open bill . in about 90% of cases , this display does not lead to copulation . older males have more red tips to the wings and are preferred by females . the nest , built by both sexes , is a cup of thin twigs lined with softer material such as fine grass , moss , fur or lichen . it is constructed 1.315 m (450 ft) above the ground in a pine or scrub , commonly close to the trunk . the eggs are a glossy pale blue spotted with black and grey and the clutch is 37 eggs , although five or six is most common . the average size of the egg is 24 mm 18 mm (0.94 in 0.71 in), and it weighs 3.8 g (0.13 oz), of which 5% is shell . the eggs are incubated for 1314 days by the female alone . she is fed regurgitated berries by her mate , and rarely leaves the nest . the chicks are altricial and naked , and have bright red mouths; they are fed by both parents , although the male brings most of the food , mainly insects , in the first few days . the young are subsequently fed largely with fruit . the chicks fledge about 1416 days after hatching . they are fed by the adults for about two weeks after fledging . breeding densities of this waxwing are typically low compared to other passerines , usually less than ten birds per square kilometre (26 per square mile) even in good habitat , although up to 356 birds per square kilometre (92 per square mile) have been found in russia . one brood each year is normal . maximum recorded ages are 5 years 10 months in north america and more than 13 years 6 months in europe . the average life expectancy is unknown . significant causes of death include predation , collisions with windows and cars , and poisoning by road salt consumed when drinking . waxwings are primarily fruit eaters , but also consume insects during the breeding season . mosquitoes and midges are the most common prey , but many other insects and some spiders are eaten . they are caught mainly by flycatching from an open perch , but some may be picked off vegetation . fruit is normally picked from trees , sometimes from the ground , and is usually swallowed whole . in the summer , vaccinium and rubus species and canada buffaloberry are important items of their diet , while cotoneaster , juniper , haws , rose hips and apples predominate outside the breeding season . rowan berries are a favourite food , and are eaten whenever available . waxwings can eat huge numbers of berries , each bird sometimes consuming several hundred a day , more than double its own weight . one individual was recorded as eating between 600 and 1,000 cotoneaster berries in six hours , and defecating every four minutes . waxwings travel significant distances when feeding and help to disperse the fruit seeds . waxwings forage in large flocks , sometimes of several hundred birds , which enables them to overwhelm birds such as mistle thrushes attempting to defend their fruit trees . fruit is rich in sugar but deficient in other nutrients , so it must be eaten in large quantities . bohemian waxwings have a large liver which helps to convert sugar to energy . they can metabolise ethanol produced from the fermentation of those sugary fruits more efficiently than humans , but may still become intoxicated , sometimes fatally . waxwings often drink water or eat snow in winter , since the sugar in their fruit diet tends to dehydrate the birds through an osmotic effect . in the summer , the fruits are juicier and water is less of a problem . in the past , the arrival of waxwings sometimes coincided with epidemics of cholera or plague , and led to the old dutch and flemish name pestvogel , "plague bird" . the juniper berries on which they fed were thought to offer protection , and people consumed the fruit and burned branches to fumigate their houses . waxwings are preyed upon by birds of prey including rough-legged buzzards , eurasian sparrowhawks , prairie falcons , and great grey shrikes . merlins attack winter flocks , including those in cities . when alarmed , bohemian waxwings "freeze" with bill and neck pointing upwards . if this fails , they fly , calling noisily . bohemian waxwings are not brood parasitised by the common cuckoo or its relatives in eurasia because the cuckoo's young cannot survive on a largely fruit diet . in north america , the waxwing's breeding range has little overlap with brown-headed cowbird , another parasitic species . nevertheless , eggs of other birds placed in a bohemian waxwing's nest are always rejected . this suggests that in the past , perhaps 3 million years ago , the ancestral waxwing was a host of a brood parasitic species , and retains the rejection behaviour acquired then . parasitic mites include syringophiloidus bombycillae , first identified on this species , and the nasal mite ptilonyssus bombycillae . blood parasites include trypanosoma species , and a leucocytozoon first identified in this waxwing . bohemian waxwings may carry flatworms and tapeworms , but levels of parasitic worm infestation are generally low . the global population of the bohemian waxwing has been estimated at more than three million birds , and the breeding range covers about 12.8 million km2 (4.9 million mi2) . although this species' population , as of 2013, appears to be declining , the decrease is not rapid nor large enough to trigger conservation vulnerability criteria . given its high numbers and huge breeding area , this waxwing is therefore classified by the international union for conservation of nature as being of least concern . the woodlands used by this species are well to the north of major human populations , and the birds can use disturbed habitats , so there are no serious long-term threats to this species . 