the american crow (corvus brachyrhynchos) is a large passerine bird species of the family corvidae . it is a common bird found throughout much of north america . american crows are the new world counterpart to the carrion crow and the hooded crow . although the american crow and the hooded crow are very similar in size , structure and behavior , their calls are different . the american crow nevertheless occupies the same role the hooded crow does in eurasia . from beak to tail , an american crows measures 4050 cm (1620 in), almost half of which is tail . mass varies from about 300 to 600 g (10 to 20 oz) . males tend to be larger than females . the most usual call is caaw-caaw-caaw . the american crow is all black , with iridescent feathers . it looks much like other all-black corvids . they can be distinguished from the common raven (c . corax) because american crows are smaller and from the fish crow (c . ossifragus) because american crows do not hunch and fluff their throat feathers when they call . american crows are common , widespread , and susceptible to the west nile virus , making them useful as a bioindicator to track the virus's spread . direct transmission of the virus from american crows to humans is unheard of and unlikely . the american crow was described by christian ludwig brehm in 1822. its scientific name means literally "short-billed crow", from ancient greek brachy- (-) "short-" and rhynchos () "billed" . the northwestern crow (c . caurinus) is very closely related to the american crow . its ancestors became separated by ice age glaciation west of the rocky mountains . it is endemic to pacific temperate rain forests where it all but replaces the american crow . only in the seattle region do they co-occur to any extent . in form the two species are much alike . there is a marked difference in voice . four subspecies are recognized . they differ in bill proportion and form a rough ne-sw clinal in size across north america . birds are smallest in the far west and on the south coast . the american crow is a distinctive bird with iridescent black feathers all over . its legs , feet and bill are also black . they are 4050 cm (1620 in) in length , of which the tail makes up about 40% . each wing is around 2734 cm (1114 in) long . the bill length is on average 5 cm (2 in), varying strongly according to location . males tend to be larger than females . the most usual call is a loud , short , and rapid caaw-caaw-caaw . usually , the birds thrust their heads up and down as they utter this call . american crows can also produce a wide variety of sounds and sometimes mimic noises made by other animals , including other birds . visual differentiation from the fish crow (c . ossifragus) is extremely difficult and often inaccurate . nonetheless , differences apart from size do exist . fish crows tend to have more slender bills and feet . there may also be a small sharp hook at the end of the upper bill . fish crows also appear as if they have shorter legs when walking . more dramatically , when calling , fish crows tend to hunch and fluff their throat feathers . if seen flying at a distance from where size estimates are unreliable , the distinctly larger common ravens (c . corax) can be distinguished by their almost lozenge-shaped tail , their larger-looking heads and of course their strongly solitary habits . they also fluff their throat feathers when calling like fish crows , only more so . most wild american crows live for about 78 years . captive birds are known to have lived up to 30 years . the range of the american crow extends from the pacific ocean to the atlantic ocean in canada , on the french islands of saint-pierre and miquelon , south through the united states , and into northern mexico . virtually all types of country from wilderness , farmland , parks , open woodland to towns and major cities are inhabited; it is absent only from pacific temperate rain forests and tundra habitat where it is replaced by the raven . this crow is a permanent resident in most of the usa , but most canadian birds migrate some distances southward in winter . outside of the nesting season these birds often gather in large communal roosts at night . the american crow was recorded in bermuda from 1876 onwards . the american crow is omnivorous . it will feed on invertebrates of all types , carrion , scraps of human food , seeds , eggs and nestlings , stranded fish on the shore and various grains . american crows are active hunters and will prey on mice , frogs , and other small animals . in winter and autumn , the diet of american crows is more dependent on nuts and acorns . occasionally , they will visit bird feeders . the american crow is one of only a few species of bird that has been observed modifying and using tools to obtain food . like most crows , they will scavenge at landfills , scattering garbage in the process . where available , corn , wheat and other crops are a favorite food . these habits have historically caused the american crow to be considered a nuisance . however , it is suspected that the harm to crops is offset by the service the american crow provides by eating insect pests . american crows are monogamous cooperative breeding birds . mated pairs form large families of up to 15 individuals from several breeding seasons that remain together for many years . offspring from a previous nesting season will usually remain with the family to assist in rearing new nestlings . american crows do not reach breeding age for at least two years . most do not leave the nest to breed for four to five years . the nesting season starts early , with some birds incubating eggs by early april . american crows build bulky stick nests , nearly always in trees but sometimes also in large bushes and , very rarely , on the ground . they will nest in a wide variety of trees , including large conifers , although oaks are most often used . three to six eggs are laid and incubated for 18 days . the young are usually fledged by about 35 days after hatching . predation primarily occurs at the nest site and eggs and nestlings are frequently eaten by snakes , raccoons , ravens and domestic cats . adults are less frequently predated but face potential attack from great horned owls , red-tailed hawks , peregrine falcons and eagles . they may be attacked by predators such as coyotes or bobcats at carrion when incautious although this is even rarer . american crows succumb easily to west nile virus infection . this was originally a mosquito-borne african virus causing encephalitis in humans and livestock since about 1000 ad , and was accidentally introduced to north america in 1999, apparently by an infected air traveller who got bitten by a mosquito after arrival . it is estimated that the american crow population has dropped by up to 45% since 1999; the disease runs most rampant in the subtropical conditions which encourage reproduction of its mosquito vectors among which culex tarsalis is most significant . mortality rates appear to be higher than those in other birds , causing local population losses of up to 72% in a single season . because of this , american crows are a sentinel species indicating the presence of west nile virus in an area . crows cannot transmit the virus to humans directly . crows have been killed in large numbers by humans , both for recreation and as part of organized campaigns of extermination . american crows are protected internationally by the migratory bird treaty act of 1918. despite attempts by humans in some areas to drive away or eliminate these birds , they remain widespread and very common . the number of individual american crows is estimated by birdlife international to be around 31,000,000. the large population , as well as its vast range , are the reasons why the american crow is considered to be of least concern , meaning that the species is not threatened . 