the purple finch (carpodacus purpureus) is a bird in the finch family fringillidae . this species and the other "american rosefinches" were formerly included with the rosefinches of eurasia in the genus carpodacus; however , the three north american species are not closely related to the rosefinches of the old world , and have thus been moved to the genus haemorhous by most taxonomic authorities . it is included in the finch family , fringillidae , which is made up of passerine birds found in the northern hemisphere , africa , and south america . the purple finch was originally described by johann friedrich gmelin in 1789.there are two subspecies of the purple finch , h . p . purpureus and h . p . californicus . h . p . californicus was identified by spencer f . baird in 1858.[2] it differs from the nominate subspecies in that it has a longer tail and shorter wings . the plumage of both males and females is darker , and the coloration of the females is more greenish . the bill of c . p . californicus is also longer than that of the nominate subspecies . adults have a short forked brown tail and brown wings and are about 15 cm (4 in) in length and weigh 34 g (1.2 oz) . adult males are raspberry red on the head , breast , back and rump; their back is streaked . adult females have light brown upperparts and white underparts with dark brown streaks throughout; they have a white line on the face above the eye . their breeding habitat is coniferous and mixed forest in canada and the northeastern united states , as well as various wooded areas along the u . s . pacific coast . they nest on a horizontal branch or in a fork of a tree . {citation needed|date=january 2010}birds from northern canada migrate to the southern united states; other birds are permanent residents . {citation needed|date=january 2010}the purple finch population has declined sharply in the east due to the house finch . most of the time , when these two species collide , the house finch outcompetes the purple finch . this bird has been also displaced from some habitat by the introduced house sparrow . these birds forage in trees and bushes , sometimes in ground vegetation . they mainly eat seeds , berries and insects . they are fond of sunflower seeds , millet , and thistle . this is the state bird of new hampshire . 