the northern flicker (colaptes auratus) is a medium-sized member of the woodpecker family . it is native to most of north america , parts of central america , cuba , the cayman islands , and is one of the few woodpecker species that migrate . there are over 100 common names for the northern flicker . among them are: yellowhammer , clape , gaffer woodpecker , harry-wicket , heigh-ho , wake-up , walk-up , wick-up , yarrup , and gawker bird . many of these names are attempts at imitating some of its calls . the northern flicker is part of the genus colaptes which encompasses 12 new-world woodpeckers . there are two living and one extinct subspecies of c . auratus species . the existing sub-species were at one time considered separate species but they commonly interbreed where ranges overlap and are now considered one species by the american ornithologists union . whether or not they are separate species is a well-known example of the species problem . adults are brown with black bars on the back and wings . a mid-to-large-sized woodpecker measures 2836 cm (1114 in) in length and 4254 cm (1721 in) in wingspan . the body mass can vary from 86 to 167 g (3.0 to 5.9 oz) . among standard scientific measurements , the wing bone measures 12.217.1 cm (4.86.7 in), the tail measures 7.511.5 cm (3.04.5 in), the bill measures 2.24.3 cm (0.871.69 in) and the tarsus measures 2.23.1 cm (0.871.22 in) . the largest-bodied specimens are from the northern stretches of the species range , such as alaska or newfoundland and labrador , whereas the smallest specimens come from grand cayman island . a necklace-like black patch occupies the upper breast , while the lower breast and belly are beige with black spots . males can be identified by a black or red moustachial stripe at the base of the beak . the tail is dark on top , transitioning to a white rump which is conspicuous in flight . the subspecies plumage varies as described in taxonomy section . this bird's call is a sustained laugh , ki ki ki ki . . . , more congenial than that of the pileated woodpecker . one may also hear a constant knocking as they often drum on trees or even metal objects to declare territory . like most woodpeckers , northern flickers drum on objects as a form of communication and territory defense . in such cases , the object is to make as loud a noise as possible , and thats why woodpeckers sometimes drum on metal objects . one northern flicker in wyoming could be heard drumming on an abandoned tractor from a half-mile away . like many woodpeckers , its flight is undulating . the repeated cycle of a quick succession of flaps followed by a pause creates an effect comparable to a rollercoaster . according to the audubon guide , "flickers are the only woodpeckers that frequently feed on the ground", probing with their beak , also sometimes catching insects in flight . although they eat fruits , berries , seeds and nuts , their primary food is insects . ants alone can make up 45% of their diet . other invertebrates eaten include flies , butterflies , moths , beetles , and snails . flickers also eat berries and seeds , especially in winter , including poison oak and ivy , dogwood , sumac , wild cherry and grape , bayberries , hackberries , and elderberries , and sunflower and thistle seeds . flickers often go after ants underground (where the nutritious larvae live), hammering at the soil the way other woodpeckers drill into wood . theyve been seen breaking into cow patties to eat insects living within . their tongues can dart out 2 inches beyond the end of the bill to snare prey . as well as eating ants , flickers have a behavior called anting , during which they use the acid from the ants to assist in preening , as it is useful in keeping them free of parasites . look for flickers in open habitats near trees , including woodlands , edges , yards , and parks . in the west you can find them in mountain forests all the way up to treeline . northern flickers generally nest in holes in trees like other woodpeckers . occasionally , theyve been found nesting in old , earthen burrows vacated by belted kingfishers or bank swallows . both sexes help with nest excavation . the entrance hole is about 3 inches in diameter , and the cavity is 13-16 inches deep . the cavity widens at bottom to make room for eggs and the incubating adult . inside , the cavity is bare except for a bed of wood chips for the eggs and chicks to rest on . once nestlings are about 17 days old , they begin clinging to the cavity wall rather than lying on the floor . the oldest known "yellow-shafted" northern flicker lived to be at least 9 years 2 months old , and the oldest red-shafted northern flicker lived to be at least 8 years 9 months old . their breeding habitat consists of forested areas across north america and as far south as central america . they are cavity nesters who typically nest in trees though they will also use posts and birdhouses if sized and situated appropriately . they prefer to excavate their own home though they will reuse and repair damaged or abandoned nests . abandoned flicker nests create habitat for other cavity nesters . flickers are sometimes driven from nesting sites by another cavity nester , european starlings . it takes about 1 to 2 weeks to build the nest which is built by both sexes of the mating pairs . the entrance hole is roughly 5 cm to 10 cm wide . a typical clutch consists of 6 to 8 eggs whose shells are pure white with a smooth surface and high gloss . the eggs are the second largest of the north american woodpecker species , exceeded only by the pileated woodpecker's . incubation is by both sexes for approximately 11 to 12 days . the young are fed by regurgitation and fledge about 25 to 28 days after hatching . northern birds migrate to the southern parts of the range; southern birds are often permanent residents . 