the acadian flycatcher (empidonax virescens) is a small insect-eating bird of the tyrant flycatcher family . adults have olive upperparts , darker on the wings and tail , with whitish underparts; they have a white eye ring , white wing bars and a wide bill . the breast is washed with olive . the upper part of the bill is dark; the lower part is yellowish . this bird's song is an explosive peet-sa . the call is a soft peet . they also have a call similar to that of the northern flicker a unique two-note song described as "ka-zeep", and its location in its preferred habitat , are two features that help to identify this species . the 15 species of this genus were once all thought to be a single species , which was discovered in acadia in present-day nova scotia . differences in range , voice , and habitat eventually identified them as separate species . the present-day "acadian flycatcher" is not found in acadia . its breeding habitat is deciduous forests , often near water , across the eastern united states and southwestern ontario . these birds migrate through eastern mexico and the caribbean to southern central america and the very northwest of south america in colombia , western venezuela , and ecuador . the numbers of these birds have declined somewhat in the southern parts of their range . brown-headed cowbirds lay eggs in the nests of these birds in some areas . however only 16% of cowbird young in acadian flycatcher nests fledge successfully . they wait on a perch in the middle of a tree and fly out to catch insects in flight (hawking), also sometimes picking insects from foliage while hovering (gleaning) . they may eat some berries and seeds . they make a loose cup nest in a horizontal fork in a tree or shrub . the acadian flycatcher is an excellent flier; it is extremely maneuverable , can hover , and can even fly backward . curiously , there is no scientific information on hopping or walking by this bird . as of october 2015 there have been 2 records of acadian flycatcher in europe , the first being a bird found dead in iceland in 1967, and the second a bird found on the beach at dungeness in kent , england in september 2015, the latter's identity being established by dna from its droppings . 