the northern fulmar (fulmarus glacialis), fulmar , or arctic fulmar is a highly abundant sea bird found primarily in subarctic regions of the north atlantic and north pacific oceans . there has been one confirmed sighting in the southern hemisphere , with a single bird seen south of new zealand . [5] fulmars come in one of two color morphs: a light one , with white head and body and gray wings and tail , and a dark one which is uniformly gray . though similar in appearance to gulls , fulmars are in fact members of the procellariidae family , which include petrels and shearwaters . the northern fulmar and its sister species , the southern fulmar (fulmarus glacialodes), are the extant members of the genus fulmarus . the fulmars are in turn a member of the order procellariiformes , and they all share certain identifying features . first , they have nasal passages that attach to the upper bill called naricorns; however , nostrils on albatrosses are on the sides of the bill , as opposed to the rest of the order , including fulmars , which have nostrils on top of the upper bill . the bills of procellariiformes are also unique in that they are split into between seven and nine horny plates . one of these plates makes up the hooked portion of the upper bill , called the maxillary unguis . they produce a stomach oil made up of wax esters and triglycerides that is stored in the proventriculus . this can be sprayed out of their mouths as a defense against predators from a very early age , and as an energy rich food source for chicks and for the adults during their long flights . it will mat the plumage of avian predators , and can lead to their death . finally , they also have a salt gland that is situated above the nasal passage that helps desalinate their bodies , due to the high amount of ocean water that they imbibe . this gland excretes a high saline solution from their nose . the northern fulmar was first described as fulmarus glacialis by carl linnaeus , in 1761, based on a specimen from within the arctic circle , on spitsbergen . the northern fulmar consists of three sub-species:fulmarus glacialis can be broken down to the old norse word full meaning "foul" and mar meaning "gull" . "foul-gull" is in reference to its stomach oil and also its superficial similarity to seagulls . finally , glacialis is latin for "glacial" because of its extreme northern range . the northern fulmar has a wingspan of {convert|102|to(-)|112|cm|in|abbr=on} and is {convert|46|cm|in|abbr=on} . body weight can range from {convert|450|to|1000|g|lb|abbr=on} . these species are grey and white with a pale yellow , thick , bill and bluish legs; however there is both a light morph and dark morph . in the pacific ocean there is an intermediate morph as well . all morphs have certain similarities , such as only the dark morph has more than dark edges on the underneath , and they all have pale inner primaries on the top of the wings . the pacific morph has a darker tail than the atlantic morph . like other petrels , their walking ability is limited , but they are strong fliers , with a stiff wing action quite unlike the gulls . they look bull-necked compared to gulls , and have short stubby bills . they are long-lived , with a lifespan of 31 years not uncommon . this fulmar will feed on shrimp , fish , squid , plankton , jellyfish , and carrion , as well as refuse . when eating fish , they will dive up to several feet deep to retrieve their prey . the northern fulmar starts breeding at between six and twelve years old . it is monogamous , and forms long term pair bonds . it returns to the same nest site year after year . breeding season starts in may; however , the female has glands that store sperm to allow weeks to pass after copulation to the laying of the egg . their nest is a scrape on a grassy ledge or a saucer of vegetation on the ground , lined with softer material . the birds nest in large colonies recently , they have started nesting on rooftops and buildings . both sexes are involved in the nest building process . a single white egg , {convert|61|mm|in|2|abbr=on} in size , is incubated for a period of 50 to 54 days , by both sexes . the altricial chick is brooded for 2 weeks and fully fledges after 70 to 75 days . again , both sexes are involved . during this period , the parents are nocturnal , and will not even be active on well-lit nights . the mating ritual of this fulmar consists of the female resting on a ledge and the male landing with his bill open and his head back . he commences to wave his head side to side and up and down while calling . they make grunting and chuckling sounds while eating and guttural calls during the breeding season . the northern fulmar is estimated to have between 15,000,000 and 30,000,000 mature individuals , that occupy an occurrence range of {convert|28400000|km2|sqmi|abbr=on} and their north american population is on the rise , hence it is listed with the iucn as least concern . the range of these species increased greatly last century due to the availability of fish offal from commercial fleets , but may contract because of less food from this source and climatic change . the population increase has been especially notable in the british isles . 