the boat-tailed grackle (quiscalus major) is a passerine bird of the family icteridae found as a permanent resident on the coasts of the southeastern united states .
 it is found in coastal saltwater marshes , and , in florida , also on inland waters .
 the nest is a well-concealed cup in trees or shrubs near water; three to five eggs are laid .
the male boat-tailed grackle is 3743 cm (1517 in) long and weighs 165250 g (5.88.8 oz) .
 adult males have entirely iridescent black plumage , a long dark bill , a pale yellowish or brown iris and a long keel-shaped tail .
 the adult female is much smaller at 2633 cm (1013 in) long and a weight of 90115 g (3.24.1 oz) .
 she is also distinguished by her shorter tail and tawny-brown coloration , which covers the body apart from the darker wings and tail .
 the wingspan in adult birds is 3950 cm (1520 in) .
 in standard measurements , this species measures 1320 cm (5.17.9 in) along the wing bone , 1120 cm (4.37.9 in) in tail length , 24.2 cm (0.791.65 in) along the culmen and 3.65.8 cm (1.42.3 in) along the tarsus .
 on average , the boat-tailed grackle weighs about 10% more than the closely related great-tailed grackle although the male great-tailed grackle has an even longer tail .
young males are black but lack the adult's iridescence .
 immature females are duller versions of the adult female and have blotches or spots on the breast .
 the eye color of the boat-tailed grackle varies with range .
 gulf coast and inland birds have dark eyes , whereas atlantic birds have pale eyes .
the boat-tailed grackle was first described by french naturalist louis jean pierre vieillot in 1819. its specific epithet major means "larger" in latin .
 despite its restricted range , there are four subspecies of the boat-tailed grackle , differing in size and iris color .
 the boat-tailed grackle was once considered the same species as the great-tailed grackle .
 the great-tailed species is generally quite similar of slightly smaller body size , but has a longer tail and lacks this species' distinct domed head shape .
 the common grackle , with which the boat-tailed species often overlaps along the atlantic coastline , is noticeably smaller and shorter-tailed , as well as lacking the domed head shape .
these birds forage on the ground , in shallow water , or in shrubs; they will steal food from other birds .
 they are omnivorous , eating insects , minnows , frogs , eggs , berries , seeds , and grain , even small birds .
boat-tailed grackles have established significant populations in several united states gulf coast cities and towns where they can be found foraging in trash bins , dumpsters , and parking lots .
this bird's song is a harsh jeeb , and it has a variety of typically grackle-like chatters and squeaks .