the crested auklet (aethia cristatella) is a small seabird of the family alcidae , distributed throughout the northern pacific and the bering sea . the species feeds by diving in deep waters , eating krill and a variety of small marine animals . it nests in dense colonies of up to 1 million individuals in the bering sea and the sea of okhotsk . it often breeds in mixed-species colonies with the least auklet , a smaller congener . the species is known for its sexual ornaments , found in both males and females . these include colorful plumage with a forehead crest , a striking scent recalling citrus fruit , and a loud trumpet call , all of which appear to have evolved through sexual selection . the total population is around 6 million , almost half in north america . it is in general considered to be of least concern , though the alaskan population faces additional threats from predation and oil spills . the crested auklet was first identified in 1769 by the german zoologist peter simon pallas , who named it aethia cristatella . the genus aethia includes four auklet species . there are no subspecies of crested auklet . the family alcidae consists of many species of shorebirds including other auklets (not in the genus aethia), puffins , razorbills , guillemots , and murres . the crested auklet can measure 1827 cm (7.110.6 in) in length , 3450 cm (1320 in) in wingspan and weigh 195330 g (6.911.6 oz) . they have a reddish-orange and yellow tipped bill , yellowish white irises , and white auricular plumes from their eyes to their ears . their bodies , wings , and tails are primarily dark sooty grey , while their legs and feet are grey and claws black . the males and females are very similar , although the females have slightly smaller and less curved bills , additionally slightly smaller crests . crested auklets are known for their forehead crests , which is made of black forward-curving feathers . these forehead crests are highly variable , and can have between two and twenty three narrow forward curving feathers . the average auklet has 12 crest feathers , which are of variable length , between 8.1 and 58.5 millimetres . auklets have auricular plumes and a bright orange bill with curved accessory plates . like forehead crests , these features vary widely within auklet populations . the crested auklet is recognized primarily by two characteristics during the breeding season . the first is its crest , a group of bristle feathers located on top of its head above its eyes . the second is a social odor that the auklets produce during the breeding season , described as smelling like tangerines . this odor originates from tiny wick feathers , located in a small patch of skin between the shoulder blades . in winter plumage , their bills are smaller and dull yellow . they lack accessory plates and their crest and auricular plumes are reduced . juveniles are similar to winter adults , but without auricular and crest plumes . their bills are smaller , and colored a dull brownish yellow . juveniles take 33 days to reach adult size . 