the pied-billed grebe (podilymbus podiceps) is a species of the grebe family of water birds . since the atitln grebe (podilymbus gigas) has become extinct , it is the sole extant member of the genus podilymbus . the pied-billed grebe is primarily found in ponds throughout the americas . he pied-billed grebe was described by carl linnaeus in the 10th edition of his systema naturae in 1758 as colymbus podiceps . the binomial name is derived from latin podilymbus , a contraction of podicipes ("feet at the buttocks", from podici-, "rump-" + pes , "foot")the origin of the name of the grebe orderand ancient greek kolymbos , "diver", and podiceps , "rump-headed", from podici- + new latin ceps . outside its own genus , the closest relatives of the pied-billed grebe are the small grebes of the genus tachybaptus . pied-billed grebes are small , stocky , and short-necked . they are 3138 cm (1215 in) in length , with a wingspan of 4562 cm (1824 in) and weigh 253568 g (8.920.0 oz) . they are mainly brown , with a darker crown and back . their brown color serves as camouflage in the marshes they live in . they do not have white under their wings when flying , like other grebes . their undertail is white and they have a short , blunt chicken-like bill that is a light grey color , which in summer is encircled by a broad black band (hence the name) . in the summer , its throat is black . there is no sexual dimorphism . juveniles have black and white stripes and look more like winter adults . this grebe does not have webbed feet . its toes have lobes that come out of the side of each toe . these lobes allow for easy paddling . when flying , the feet appear behind the body due to the feet's placement in the far back of the body . it may be confused with the least grebe , although that species is much smaller and has a thinner bill . other similarly sized grebes are very distinct in plumage , i . e . the eared grebe and horned grebe . both species bear much more colorful breeding plumage , with rufous sides , golden crests along the side of the head against contrasting slaty color (also a rufous neck in the horned); while in winter , both the eared and horned grebes are pied with slaty and cream color and have red eyes . its call is unique , loud and sounds like a "whooping kuk-kuk-cow-cow-cow-cowp-cowp . " its call is similar to the yellow-billed cuckoo . they are most commonly found throughout north america , central america and south america year round . during the summer breeding season , they are most prevalent in central , northern and northeastern canada . if they live in an area where the water freezes in the winter they will migrate . migrating birds generally meet with year round birds in september and october . they migrate at night . most migratory birds leave in march or april . they make occasional appearances in europe and hawaii . in the united kingdom , pied-billed grebe visits have numbered 37 sightings as of 2007, appearing generally in october to january . one bird in england bred with a little grebe , producing hybrid young . it is the only grebe on record to have visited the galapagos islands . pied-billed grebes are found in freshwater wetlands with emergent vegetation , such as cattails . they are occasionally found in salt water . when breeding they are found in emergent vegetation near open water , and in the winter they are primarily found in open water due to the lack of nests to maintain . they may live near rivers , but prefer still water . they may be found in higher elevations when migrating . they will breed in restored and man-made wetlands . pied-billed grebes live approximately 1012 years . pied-billed grebes rarely fly . they make a slow dive frequently , especially when in danger , diving to about 20 ft (6.1 m) or less . they dive for about 30 seconds and may move to a more secluded area of the water , allowing only the head to be visible to watch the danger dissipate . this frequency in diving has earned them the description of being reclusive or shy in nature . it has also earned them nicknames like "hell-diver . " they rarely spend time in flocks . their courtship include calling and sometimes duets . males will show territorial behaviour if another male is at the edge of his territory . they face each other and then turn their heads and bills up . then they turn away and start calling . then they turn back around to look at one another . the pied-billed grebe breeds in south-central canada , throughout the united states , central america , the caribbean , and temperate south america . these grebes may lay up to two sets of eggs a year . their nests sit on top of the water , their eggs sitting in vegetation that resides in the water . grebes lay between three and ten bluish white smooth elliptical eggs with the female starting the incubation process . they are incubated for around 23 days by both parents , with the female taking over incubation duties towards the end of that time period . they will cover the nest with nesting material if they have to leave it for an extended period of time . young grebes may leave the nest within one day of hatching . they are downy at birth . yellow skin is seen between the lore and top of the head . they do not swim well and stay out of the water . they sleep on their parents' backs . within four weeks they start swimming . when alerted they will climb on the back of a parent grebe and eventually mature to dive under the water like their parents . both parents share the role of raising the young both feeding and carrying them on their backs . sometimes the parents will dive underwater to get food with the chicks on their backs . pied-billed grebes feed mainly on aquatic invertebrates , and also on small fish and amphibians (frogs , tadpoles) . they dive to obtain food . their bills allow them to crush crustaceans , like crawfish . they may also eat plants . they have been shown to eat their own feathers , like other grebes , to aid in digestion (prevent injury from small bones) . they will also feed their feathers to their young . they are extremely sensitive to disturbances , especially by humans . while breeding , if scared , adults may abandon their nests without protecting the eggs . the waves from boats can destroy the nests and their sounds easily frighten the birds . 