the least auklet , aethia pusilla , is a seabird and the smallest species of auk . it is the most abundant seabird in north america , and one of the most abundant in the world , with a population of around nine million birds . they breed on the islands of alaska and siberia , and spend the winter close to the edge of the ice sheet . their largest colonies are on the aleutian islands , st . lawrence island and little diomede island . least auklets feed predominantly on calanoid copepods , particularly those of the genus neocalanus . they also eat euphausiids , pteropods and other zooplankton species . they hunt for these in stratified waters caused where upwelling and thermoclines cause these prey items to be tightly clumped together . like all auks they are pursuit divers , using their wings to provide thrust and "fly" under the water . they are voracious predators , consuming 86% of their body weight each day . least auklets are highly colonial , nesting in rocky crevices in colonies of up to a million birds . these colonies are often mixed , with other species of auklet nesting with , and competing with the least auklets . while this coexistence with other species may bring the benefits of protection from predators , least auklets are vulnerable to being displaced from their nesting sites by the larger crested auklets . a single egg is laid in the crevice and incubated for a month , after which a semi-precocial black downy chick is hatched . both parents share incubation duties , as well as brooding and feeding duties . unlike many auks , which are fed fish carried crosswise in the bill , chicks of the least auklet are fed copepods and other zooplankton from a sublingual pouch , as are other small auklets . the chicks receive no further parental care after they fledge , and can dive to hunt as soon as they leave the nest . least auklets are vulnerable to oil spills and introduced species . the introduction of arctic foxes to many of the aleutian islands caused the species to be wiped out on many of those islands , and rats are also a problem on many islands . however , at present they are still a very common species . 