the green violetear is a medium-sized , metallic green hummingbird species commonly found in forested areas from mexico to nicaragua . this species , together with the lesser violetear were previously considered conspecific , and together called the green violetear . the green violetear belongs to the order apodiformes . hummingbirds share this order with the swifts , such as the white-collared swift . the name apodiformes is derived from the greek words "a pous ," meaning "without foot . " while apidiforms do in fact have feet , they are quite small and their legs are short and relatively weak . many birds in this order cannot walk , and thus rarely if ever land on the ground since quick escape from predators is virtually impossible . for this reason members of this order spend a majority of their time in the air . the mexican violetear is roughly medium-sized by hummingbird standards . it averages around 9.7 to 12 cm (3.8 to 4.7 in) in total length . its bill is black and mostly straight with only a slight downward curve and measures from 1.8 to 2.5 cm (0.71 to 0.98 in) . [2] the body mass can vary from 4.8 to 5.6 g (0.17 to 0.20 oz) . among standard measurements , the wing chord is 5.8 to 6.8 cm (2.3 to 2.7 in) and the tail is 3.5 to 4.3 cm (1.4 to 1.7 in) . it is shining green above with a glittering violet ear-patch on the sides of its neck . its throat and chest are a more glittering green with a shining green belly . the tail is a metallic blue-green with more bronzy central feathers and a prominent black subterminal band . solitary males sing from high , exposed twigs in their territory every day . their song is a monotonously repeated sharp and dry tsu-tzeek at a rate of about one call per second . the mexican violetear breeds from the highlands of southern mexico south to nicaragua . it is a rare but annual nonbreeding visitor to the united states , primarily southern and central texas , with scattered records as far north as extreme southern canada . common habitats for the mexican violetear is in the canopy and borders of subtropical and lower temperate forest , secondary woodland and scrub , and clearings and gardens in the subtropical zone . it is recorded mostly between altitudes of 1,200 to 2,300 m (3,900 to 7,500 ft), though they will sometimes wander as far down as 500 m (1,600 ft) in search of food sources . it generally prefers more humid and high-altitude areas , such as cloud forests . the mexican violetear forages alone but tends to gather at flowering trees , especially coffee-shade inga . they feed at mid-level to canopy and often hold and defend a feeding territory . they primarily feed on nectar and small insects . like most hummingbirds , the mexican violetear is a solitary nester . the males only involvement in the breeding process is to attract and mate with the female . the female is then responsible for choosing a nest location , generally on a low , small horizontal branch in a protected area . the nest is small and built from various plant materials , spider webs , and down woven together to form a sturdy cup structure . two small white eggs are laid within the nest and the female incubates them on her own . incubation time is 1418 days . hatchlings are primarily fed insects due to high nutritional requirements . no information was found on the length of the nestling stage or age at fledgling . breeding takes place though the wet season into the early dry season , which varies by latitude . 