the western meadowlark (sturnella neglecta) is a medium-sized icterid bird , about 8.5 in (21.6 cm) long . it nests on the ground in open country in western and central north america . it feeds mostly on insects , but also seeds and berries . it has distinctive calls described as watery or flute-like , which distinguish it from the closely related eastern meadowlark . adults have yellow underparts , with a black "v" on the breast , and white flanks which are streaked with black . their upper parts are mostly brown , but also have black streaks . these birds have long pointed bills and their heads are striped with light brown and black . their breeding habitats are grasslands , prairies , pastures , and abandoned fields , all of which may be found from across western and central north america to northern mexico . where their range overlaps with the eastern species , these birds prefer thinner , drier vegetation; the two types of birds generally do not interbreed but do defend territory against one another . their nests are situated on the ground , and are covered with a roof woven from grass . there may be more than one nesting female in a male's territory . their nests are sometimes destroyed by mowing operations with eggs and young in them . western meadowlarks will interbreed with eastern meadowlarks where their ranges overlap; however , resulting young appear to have low fertility . western meadowlarks are permanent residents throughout much of their range . northern birds may migrate to the southern parts of their range; some birds also move east in the southern united states . these birds forage on the ground or in low to semi-low vegetation . they sometimes search for food by probing with their bills . they mainly eat insects , although they will devour seeds and berries . in winter , these birds often feed in flocks . these birds have a flute-like warbled song . these calls contrast with the simple , whistled call of the eastern meadowlark . these two species were considered to be the same species for some time; the western species , having been overlooked for some time , was given the species name neglecta . this is the state bird of kansas , montana , nebraska , north dakota , oregon and wyoming . only the northern cardinal is the state bird of more states . 