the orchard oriole , icterus spurius , is the smallest north american species of icterid blackbird . the subspecies of the caribbean coast of mexico , i . s . fuertesi , is sometimes considered a separate species , the ochre oriole . this species is 6.3 inches (16 cm) long and weighs 20 g . the bill is pointed and black with some blue-gray at the base of the lower mandible (howell and webb 1995) . the adult male of the nominate subspecies has chestnut on the underparts , shoulder , and rump , with the rest of the plumage black . in the subspecies i . s . fuertesi , the chestnut is replaced with ochre (howell and webb 1995) . the adult female and the juvenile of both subspecies have olive-green on the upper parts and yellowish on the breast and belly . all adults have pointed bills and white wing bars . (orchard orioles are considered to be adults after their second year . ) one-year-old males are yellow-greenish with a black bib . the breeding habitat is semi-open areas with deciduous trees . i . s . spurius breeds in spring across eastern north america from near the united states-canada border south to central mexico . a 2009 study also found breeding in the thorn forest of baja california sur and the coast of sinaloa during the summer "monsoon"; this region had previously been thought to be only a migratory stopover (rohwer , hobson , and rohwer , 2009) . i . s . fuertesi breeds from southern tamaulipas to veracruz (howell and webb 1995) . these birds enjoy living in shaded trees within parks along lakes and streams . the nest is a tightly woven pouch attached to a fork on a horizontal branch . their nests tend to sit close together . the nominate subspecies' winter range extends from the coastal lowlands of central sinaloa and southern veracruz south to northern colombia and northwestern venezuela (scharf and kren 1996) . the ochre subspecies has been observed in winter on the pacific slope of mexico (howell and webb 1995) . nominate orchard orioles depart from their winter habitats in march and april and arrive in their breeding habitats from late april to late may . usually , they leave their breeding territories in late july and early august and arrive on their winter territories in mid august . these birds are nocturnal migrants . while in breeding season , they eat insects and spiders . when the season changes , their diet also includes ripe fruit , which quickly passes through their digestive tract . during the winter , their diet consists of fruit , nectar ,and insects . when in flight , orchard orioles generally swoop close to the ground and fly at or below treetop levelduring courtship , females display themselves in 3 unique ways . the first way is bowing their head and torso toward the male . seesawing , the second courtship display , involves repetitively alternating lowering and raising the head and tail . the third display is begging , which is fast-paced fluttering of wings halfway extended , followed by a high whistle . the specific name spurius refers to the original misidentification of the male as a female baltimore oriole . these birds are sometimes mistakenly identified as new world warblers . 