the scott 's oriole , icterus parisorum , is a medium-sized icterid .
it is primarily found in the southwestern united states and south to baja california sur and central mexico .
this bird was named by darius n. couch in honour of general winfield scott .
although it was later discovered that it had previously been described by bonaparte , the common name was retained .1 medium-sized oriole with black hood extending onto breast and back .
belly and rump are bright yellow .
the wings are black with yellow shoulder patches and two white bars .
tail is yellow with thick black tip and central line .
strong direct flight with rapid wing beats .
breeds in southern california , southern nevada , utah , arizona , new mexico , and western texas .
	spends winters mainly south of the u.s.-mexico border .
found in desert grassland prairies and mountain canyons , particularly if yucca or palms are present ; nests in pinyon-juniper woodlands , sycamores , and cottonwoods .
it is one of the first birds to start singing each day , starting before sunrise .
it can be heard at all times of the day and throughout most of the summer .
the scott 's oriole is closely associated with yuccas in much of its range .
it forages for insects on the plant , eats nectar fromthe flowers , weaves its nest from fibers taken from dead leaves , and hangs the nest from live leaves .
this bird was named by darius n. couch in honour of general winfield scott .
although it was later discovered that it had previously been described by bonaparte , the common name was retained .
a group of orioles are collectively known as a `` pitch '' and a `` split '' of orioles .1 the brilliant yellow and black scott 's oriole is a bird of desert hillsides , found in the arid southwest and into mexico .
adult description
medium-sized songbird .
long tail .
rather thin , straight , pointed bill .
two wingbars on each dark wing .
yellow to yellow-green .
male lemon yellow with black head and chest .
male description
head , back , throat , and chest black .
rest of body lemon yellow .
wings black with a white wingbar and a yellow upper wingbar or epaulet bordered in white .
tail black with yellow bases to outer tail feathers .
female description
variable amount of black spots or streaks on head , back , and throat .
back olive-gray .
underparts yellow to yellowish olive .
wings brownish black with two whitish wingbars .
tail olive ; yellowish at base .
immature description
juvenile dull olive .
first year male resembles adult female .
first year female similar , but duller and more brownish , and generally without black on throat or back .